Alright, so firstly, before we move on to conditional comprehensions, I just want to point out that I've created
a new project, comprehensions, and I've just removed all the music files that were hanging around from
a previous project, just to clear things up. So you can grab a download of that file from the last video.
That's got everything that you're seeing at the start of this video. So moving on as
I mentioned - conditional comprehensions.
So it's actually very common to have an if clause inside a for loop, and we can do that with comprehensions
as well.
Now in one of the earlier videos about lists, we created a menu and then we printed out all the meals that
didn't contain spam.
So I'm going to put that code into a new file here.
But also that file is available in the resources section of this video if you want to grab it and you
don't care to type it in again.
So the file I'm going to create here,
I'm going to call it condcomp,
conditional comprehensions.
OK, I'm going to paste that code in, like so,
and we'll just run the program to make sure that it works still.
And you can see it's working correctly down the bottom. That's giving us all the meals without spam.
Now we can do the same thing with a comprehension by adding an if clause to that comprehension.
So let's go and do that,
starting on line 17, and we'll type
meals equals left square brackets meal for meal in menu.
And then the if clause is, if double quotes spam double quotes,
basically spam in double quotes, not in meal.
Then we've got our closing right square bracket, and we can print out the result, meals. So when I to run that, we should
get the correct meals in our lists, and you can see down here that that has actually happened.
So our comprehension now specifies a filter, as you can see on screen, extending the incomplete definition
that we saw earlier.
Now a comprehension has an expression, just the value of meal in this example, but the expression can be
much more complicated.
Next is the iteration, and that can be followed by one or more filters.
Alright so back in IntelliJ. So, I'm not making the comprehensions print out the values because I've showed
you how to do that earlier.
It's actually clearer here to see what the comprehension produces if we just print out the list itself.
Now I could get exactly the same behavior by appending the meals to a list in the for loop, but that
doesn't really add anything to the explanation.
So just to be clear though, I'll quickly do that.
So I'm going to add a line here, above the for, the for loops, so meals equals, creating an empty list, left and
right square brackets.
Then after the 'if spam not in meal' we can put meals dot append meal.
And what I could do then is indent this one back to print meal, to make that then print
meals. Run it and basically we've got the same result, but that's just taking up more time and really doesn't
add anything to the explanation.
Alright,
so what we've done there in the comprehension, well all I've done is add an if clause to the end, and I'm talking
about this code on line 19.
In fact the comprehension reads almost the same as the for loop.
Now the values added to the list will be meal for each meal in menu, and we're adding the condition
if spam and double quotes not in meal.
Now that's probably straightforward but it may not be obvious exactly what's happening here.
Now looking at it at face value it looks like a normal condition using if, but in fact it's more like
a filter.
So the meal here is only included in the list if the condition is true,
otherwise it's skipped.
So does the difference matter?
Well the answer to that is, it can do. So I modified the loop earlier, so lets just add the message to the list
instead of printing it.
So back up here, we've got meal dot append,
if not spam, but we can put an else in here,
and I'll put meals dot append. Because we're not printing it out here,
we'll just put an entry to make it obvious a meal was skipped. Alright
so run it,
and you can see that that seems to behave as we'd expect it to behave, showing the entries that have been skipped,
and also showing the entries that were included because they weren't spam.
So that's a very common thing to see in a for loop.
So how do we get our comprehensions to do the same thing?
So at first attempt you might come back to that comprehension which is now line 21, and add the else
clause here. So you might put else and double quotes, a meal.
I can't type!
But obviously, that's giving us an error so there's no point me continuing on to that.
So how do we actually fix this?
Well the answer is we can't.
The if in our comprehension is being used to filter the meals, and you can't have an else clause in there.
So the key here to keep in mind is the word filter.
So we're not making up new values, we're just iterating over the sequence and allowing through certain values
based on that condition.
Now if a value meets the condition, it's allowed in,
otherwise it's not. So filter either lets things through or it doesn't.
So in other words it can't be used to produce anything else, which is why we can't use an else clause.
We're getting an error.
But don't despair because there's something else we can do in this case.
Now I don't want to digress too much at the moment, so I'll cover that a bit later. For now though,
I'm just going to undo that change and we'll look at that
if filter in a bit more detail.
OK so what if we didn't want chicken in the meal either?
Now this syntax is going to look a bit strange but we can actually do this.
We can put, we've got our 'if spam not in meal', we can come along on the end here and put 'if chicken not in meal',
remembering that we had chicken in the output before.
Run it this time and you can see that the chicken has been successfully removed.
Now you may see filters written that way, and it's actually certainly perfectly valid.
In fact it can be a good way to make complicated conditions more readable, but a more usual way to write
that would be to use
and. So lets duplicate this line and we'll comment out the first one, and we're going to change this line. And
the obvious change here would be 'if spam not in meal', and instead of 'if' there, we use the word 'and', 'and chicken not
in meal'.
And if we run that just to confirm that it works, you can see we get the same result there -
we've got no spam but also no chicken.
So we've presented many alternative ways of doing the same thing throughout the course, and a common question
we get asked is "which should I use"?
Now sometimes that's easy to answer
and generally, I'll mention that in the videos.
But other times it really doesn't make a difference,
and this is one of those other times. Use whichever form here makes the most sense.
You can even mix them, which is what I meant when I said it can make complicated conditions more readable.
Now to see what I mean by that,
let's say we get a fussy customer to our restaurant.
Now they love spam and they love eggs. They also like bacon and sausage,
but for some reason they can't stand bacon with sausage.
Now there's quite a few ways to phrase a condition like that, but it comes down to; choose meals with
spam or eggs,
meals can contain bacon or sausage, as long as they're not together.
Now reading that as two separate filters makes the code a bit more readable.
So let's see the code which I'm going to add to the end of this program. Close down the run window for now.
So we'll start on line 25 here,
fussy meals equals left and right square bracket, or brackets, meal for meal in menu.
And if spam in double quotes, or eggs in double quote, quotes, in meal, if not, parentheses double quote bacon double quote
in meal and sausage in meal.
And then we want a right parentheses there to close off and then our right square bracket - and I made a typo there,
that should be in meal, if spam in meal.
So there's the code, fussy meals equals,
and that's a bit better.
OK,
so there's our code, fussy meals equals meal for meal in menu.
If spam in double quotes in meal, or eggs in double quote in meal, and another condition, if not, then we've got
parentheses there, bacon in double quotes in meal and sausage in meal, then right parentheses and a square bracket.
OK now let's print it out.
OK, we'll run it.
So they should all contain spam and eggs, as you can see here, but you can't see any, I can't see any,
that have actually got both bacon and sausage.
So basically you can see with that line, that the first one lets through any meals, that's the first part,
so lets through any meals that contain spam or eggs. We've used or instead of and there, so either of those. Then
the second one, the second filter here, filters out any meal that contains both bacon and sausages in a meal.
So it's not a trivial condition, and specifying it as two separate filters makes it easier to see what's
going on.
So what I'll do though, just to show you to be consistent here, and I might just move this over a bit so we've got a bit
more space,
I'm going to actually paste in the equivalent code using a single filter,
and again, you can get this pasted in code from the resources section of this video.
Firstly we'll just run it to make sure we've got the equivalent results,
and you can see the results are identical.
And in terms of the actual code,
we have got a warning here about the line being too long.
And what we can do and the quickest way of solving that; Code, Reformat.
So we'll get IntelliJ to
help us,
and you can see that's nicely formatted things for us.
And let's do the same here, just to make it a little bit easier to read.
I'll just delete that comment.
Alright,
so what have we got here.
Well this is the code that I've pasted in on line 29.
That's now using a single filter instead of the double, or the two filters we used on the code, with the
code on line 25.
And again we ran the code, you can see down the bottom - it performs the same result each time.
So the second form, using a single complex condition, which you can see that I've used again on line 29,
that's harder to understand, and it was even harder to write correctly first time. The parentheses around
the first condition are essential.
Now of course, if you find the second method more readable, then by all means write your code that way.
In terms of performance though, there's nothing to choose between either one.
Alright, so I'm going to stop the video here. In the next one, we're going to review using if as an expression,
and then see how we can solve that earlier problem, using else in the comprehension to add something that
doesn't appear in the original sequence.
So I'll see you in the next video.